[SYCL][Doc] Extended group load/store APIs proposal (#7593)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store.asciidoc

specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_GROUP_LOAD_STORE` to one of the values defined in the
table below. Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine
if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the
macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Load API

==== Single Value Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter,
                      OutputT& out, Properties = {});
}
----

_Preconditions_: `in_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `InputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.

> * Value type of `InputIteratorT` must be convertible to `OutputT`.

Reviewer: I was thinking about the implementation a bit.  I presume these functions will use **OpSubgroupBlockReadINTEL** and **OpSubgroupBlockWriteINTEL** from [SPV_INTEL_subgroups](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Registry/blob/main/extensions/INTEL/SPV_INTEL_subgroups.html).

When the type is not a fundamental scalar (e.g. a class), I presume you will just do a bunch of those operations to load or store the object piecemeal.  However, this assumes that the type is trivially copyable.  Do we need to add a constraint like:

> The value type of `InputIteratorT` and the type `OutputT` must both be trivially copyable.

Reviewer 2: I think being default-constructible would also help. So that I could do

```
using value_type = std::iterator_traits<InputIteratorT>::value_type;
static_assert(sizeof(value_type) == 6); // For weird types.
value_type tmp[NElems];
uintN x = /*spirv-block-load*/;
ushortN y = /*spirv-block-load*/;

memcpy(tmp, &x, ...);
memcpy(tmp + /* ... */, &y, ...);
```

But we can update the spec wording once we have implementation PR that makes use of that.

Reviewer 2: Or maybe I could do

```
char storage[size_in_bytes];
auto tmp_ptr = reinterpret_cast<value_type*>(storage);
```

and it won't be necessary to default-construct...

Reviewer: You should not do the `reinterpret_cast` like this because this is undefined behavior by C++ rules.  In fact, this code is likely to break if the default constructor is not trivial.  If we need the value type of `InputIteratorT` to be default constructible, we should add that as a constraint.

Reviewer: @aelovikov-intel and I chatted about this.  There are two ways he can write the algorithm, which have slight different requirements on the type:

1. He can assume that the type is "implicit lifetime", or
2. He can assume that the type is both "trivially copyable" and "default constructible".

The two options differ in the case when the default constructor is not trivial but some other constructor (like the copy constructor) is trivial.  We think that either implementation will be performant for types that don't do weird things in their constructors.

The algorithm in option 2 will construct a temporary object and then memcpy data over the object.  The default constructor for some types (e.g. `std::complex`) value-initializes its fields.  We assume that the optimizer will remove this initialization code since the contents of the object will be immediately overwritten with the memcpy, but Andrei will verify.

It seems to me that the constraints in option 2 are easier to explain to users, and it's also nice that there are C++17 traits that correspond to these constraints.  (The trait `std::is_implicit_lifetime` isn't added until C++23.)  Therefore, I think we should go with option 2, and thus we should add a new constraint to these functions saying that the type must be default constructible.

Did I get that right, @aelovikov-intel?

One thing we need clarification on, Andrei -- is this a constraint on `OutputT` or on the value type of `InputIteratorT`?

Reviewer 2: > Did I get that right, @aelovikov-intel?

Yes! Also, implicit liftime approach is best implementable using C++23's `start_lifetime_as` which is another argument in favor of `default_constructible` trait.

> One thing we need clarification on, Andrei -- is this a constraint on OutputT or on the value type of InputIteratorT?

I think it's both `InputIteratorT` and `OutputIteratorT` for stores:

```
  bytes = block_load
  InputIteratorT::value_type tmp[N]; // default_constructible
  memcpy // trivially_copyable is used here and implicitly in block_load
  out[i] = tmp[i] for ...
```

For store that would be

```
  OutputIteratorT tmp[N]; // default_constructible
  tmp[i] = in[i] for ...
  block_store  // trivially_copyable is implicitly used here
```

Author: Great, added! Am I right what we don't need it for a scalar version (or should I still add it for consistency)?

Reviewer 2: We have "scalar" block load in SPIR-V, so I expect that it is needed.

Author: added everywhere + also for both types (input/output)

link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[SYCL Properties Extension]
requirements to identify data_placement similar to
link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_sort extention`]
`input_data_placement` and `output_data_placement`:
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct data_placement_key {
  template <data_placement_enum Type>
  using value_t =
      property_value<data_placement_key,
                     std::integral_constant<data_placement_enum, Type>>;
};

template <data_placement_enum Type>
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<Type> data_placement;

inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<data_placement_enum::blocked> data_placement_blocked;
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<data_placement_enum::striped> data_placement_striped;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

Specifies data layout used in group_load/store for `sycl::vec` or fixed-size
arrays functions.

Example:
`group_load(g, input, output_span, data_placement_blocked);`

=== Optimization Hints

anchor:optimization_hints[]

> As `InputIteratorT` and `OutputIteratorT` are supposed to be random access but
> not garanteed to be contiguous, the following property is introduced to be used

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As `InputIteratorT` and `OutputIteratorT` are permitted to be random access iterators they
are not guaranteed to be contiguous. The following property is introduced to be used
```

as a hint to the implementation for optimization purposes:

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct contiguous_memory_hint {
  using value_t =
      property_value<contiguous_memory_hint>;
};

inline constexpr contiguous_memory_hint::value_t contiguous_memory;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

> Example, we imply that `input` is contiguous iterator:
> `group_load(g, input, output_span, contiguous_memory);`

Reviewer 3: I think "assert" is stronger here; we're not just implying something, but telling the compiler it's true.  Because of that, we also need to explain what happens if the optimization hint is provided and it's untrue.

```suggestion
For example, we can assert that `input` is a contiguous iterator:
`group_load(g, input, output_span, contiguous_memory);`

If `input` isn't a contiguous iterator, the behavior is undefined.
```

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct data_placement_key {
  template <data_placement_enum Type>
  using value_t =
      property_value<data_placement_key,
                     std::integral_constant<data_placement_enum, Type>>;
};

template <data_placement_enum Type>
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<Type> data_placement;

inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<data_placement_enum::blocked> data_placement_blocked;
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<data_placement_enum::striped> data_placement_striped;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

Specifies data layout used in group_load/store for `sycl::vec` or fixed-size
arrays functions.

Example:
`group_load(g, input, output_span, data_placement_blocked);`

=== Optimization Hints

anchor:optimization_hints[]

==== Contiguous memory

As `InputIteratorT` and `OutputIteratorT` are permitted to be random access
iterators they are not guaranteed to be contiguous.
The following property is introduced to be used
as a hint to the implementation for optimization purposes:

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

> struct contiguous_memory_hint {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
struct contiguous_memory_key {
```

The naming convention for properties is that the struct has the suffix "_key" and the name of the property is the same but without the suffix.  Therefore, either name this `contiguous_memory_hint_key` / `contiguous_memory_hint` or  `contiguous_memory_key` / `contiguous_memory`,

As @Pennycook mentioned elsewhere, this is an assertion, not a hint, so I think we should not use "hint" in the name.  Therefore, if you prefer the longer name, it should be like `contiguous_memory_assertion_key`.

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

For example, we can assert that there is no uneven group partition,
so the implementation can rely on `get_max_local_range()` range size:
`group_load(sg, input, output_span, full_sub_group);`

If partition is uneven the behavior is undefined.

== Usage Example

Example shows the simplest case without local memory usage of blocked load
of global memory from `input` to the array `data` and store it back to
`output`

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl_exp = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

constexpr std::size_t block_size = 32;
constexpr std::size_t items_per_thread = 4;
constexpr std::size_t block_count = 2;
constexpr std::size_t size = block_count * block_size * items_per_thread;

sycl::queue q;
T* input = sycl::malloc_device<T>(size, q);
T* output = sycl::malloc_device<T>(size, q);

q.submit([&](sycl::handler& cgh) {
    cgh.parallel_for(
        sycl::nd_range<1>(size, block_size),
        [=](sycl::nd_item<1> item) {
            T data[items_per_thread];

            auto g = item.get_group();

            auto offset = g.get_group_id(0) * g.get_local_range(0) *
                                       items_per_thread;

>             sycl_exp::group_load(g, input + offset, sycl::span{ data }, sycl::contiguous_memory);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            sycl_exp::group_load(g, input + offset, sycl::span{ data }, sycl_exp::contiguous_memory);
```

Elsewhere also.

==== Fixed-size Array Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Store API
template<typename Group, typename OutputIteratorT, typename InputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_store(Group g, sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in,
                 OutputIteratorT out_iter,  Properties = {});

}
----

._Preconditions_:
* `out_iter` must be the same for all work-items in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a
work-group or sub-group.
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* `InputT` must be convertible to value type of `OutputIteratorT`.
* `InputT` and value type of `OutputIteratorT` must be trivially copyable
 and default constructible.

_Effects_: Stores `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_iter`
using the `g` group object.

Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default placement is a blocked one:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * ItemsPerWorkItem + i]` = `in[i];`
in striped case:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + g.get_local_linear_range() * i]` = `in[i];`
for `i` between `0` and `ItemsPerWorkItem`.

> Properties may also provide a hint for optimization purposes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Properties may also provide assertions which can enable better optimizations
```

Or, it might read better to integrate the link like this:

```suggestion
Properties may also provide xref:optimization_properties[assertions] which can enable better optimizations.
```

And similar for the other place that have this sentence.

|1
|{1, 4, 7, 10}
|2
|{2, 5, 8, 11}
|===

This extention adds a property that satisfies
link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[SYCL Properties Extension]
requirements to identify data_placement similar to
link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_sort extention`]
`input_data_placement` and `output_data_placement`:
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct data_placement_key {
  template <data_placement_enum Type>
  using value_t =
      property_value<data_placement_key,
                     std::integral_constant<data_placement_enum, Type>>;
};

template <data_placement_enum Type>
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<Type> data_placement;

inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<data_placement_enum::blocked> data_placement_blocked;
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<data_placement_enum::striped> data_placement_striped;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

Specifies data layout used in group_load/store for `sycl::vec` or fixed-size
arrays functions.

Example:
`group_load(g, input, output_span, data_placement_blocked);`

> === Optimization Hints

Reviewer: I think we should not use the word "hint" when describing these properties.  In other extensions, we use the word "hint" in cases when the property will not change the semantics of the program.  Even if you set a "hint" property wrong, the program will still run correctly.  The program may run slower when the hint is wrong, but it will never break.

We use the word "assertion" when the property could change the correctness of the program.  With an "assertion", the programmer is guaranteeing that something is true, and the program may run incorrectly if the property is set wrong.

Therefore, I'd suggest changing this section title to:

```suggestion
=== Optimization Properties
```

> anchor:optimization_hints[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
anchor:optimization_properties[]
```

==== Contiguous memory

As `InputIteratorT` and `OutputIteratorT` are permitted to be random access
iterators they are not guaranteed to be contiguous.
The following property is introduced to be used

> as a hint to the implementation for optimization purposes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as an assertion to the implementation that can improve performance:
```

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct contiguous_memory_key {
  using value_t =

>       property_value<contiguous_memory_hint>;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      property_value<contiguous_memory_key>;
```

};

> inline constexpr contiguous_memory_hint::value_t contiguous_memory;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inline constexpr contiguous_memory_key::value_t contiguous_memory;
```

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----

For example, we can assert that `input` is a contiguous iterator:
`group_load(g, input, output_span, contiguous_memory);`

If `input` isn't a contiguous iterator, the behavior is undefined.

==== Groups partitioning

> The following property can be used as a hint that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following property can be used as an assertion that
```

macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Load API

==== Single Value Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter,
                      OutputT& out, Properties = {});
}
----

_Preconditions_: `in_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `InputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* Value type of `InputIteratorT` must be convertible to `OutputT`.
* Value type of `InputIteratorT` and `OutputT` must be trivially copyable
 and default constructible.

_Effects_: Loads single element from `in_iter` to `out` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location as `in_iter` + `g.get_local_linear_id()`.

> `Properties` argument is reserved for future revisions of this extention and is
> ignored now. Default value is empty
> `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::empty_properties_t`.
> May be used in future for setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work
> items.

Reviewer 3: Is this still true, or does the `contiguous` property make sense for this overload now?  If it does, I think you should include a similar note as the other overload:

```suggestion
Properties may provide a hint for optimization purposes
xref:optimization_hints[optimization_hints].
```

xref:optimization_hints[optimization_hints].

=== Store API

==== Single Value Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Store API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputT,
         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_store(Group g, const InputT& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_iter, Properties = {});

}
----

_Preconditions_: `out_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* `InputT` must be convertible to value type of `OutputIteratorT`.
* `InputT` and value type of `OutputIteratorT` must be trivially copyable
 and default constructible.

_Effects_: Stores single element `in` to `out_iter` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location as `out_iter` + `g.get_local_linear_id()`

`Properties` argument is reserved for future revisions of this extention and is
ignored now.
Default value is empty `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::empty_properties_t`
May be used in future for setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work

> items.

Reviewer 3: Same question as above.  Can we use `contiguous` here?

If `input` isn't a contiguous iterator, the behavior is undefined.

==== Groups partitioning

The following properties  is introduced to be used

> as a hint that implementation can use get_max_local_range():

Reviewer 3: Users might not understand why this is helpful for implementations, so I think we should be a little more explicit here.  Maybe something like:

```suggestion
The following property can be used as a hint that
`get_local_range()` is equivalent to `get_max_local_range()`,
which may enable more aggressive optimizations for some
implementations.

[NOTE]
====
Using `full_group` is necessary to generate SPIR-V block read
and block write instructions, because these instructions are
defined to use the maximum group size as the stride.
====
```

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct full_work_group_hint {
  using value_t =
      property_value<full_work_group_hint>;
};

inline constexpr full_work_group_hint::value_t full_work_group;

struct full_sub_group_hint {
  using value_t =
      property_value<full_sub_group_hint>;
};

> inline constexpr full_sub_group_hint::value_t full_sub_group;

Reviewer 3: I think we should combine these into one hint.  We can call it `full_group` for now.

We already know whether we're using a group or a sub-group from the first argument.  There are also going to be other group types in the future, and it would be convenient to be able to re-use the same property across all of those group types as well.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure `full_group` is a good name. `parallel_for` requires that global size is a multiple of a work group size, so WG is always "full" in some sense. It might still be that the last SG of each WG isn't full.

Reviewer 3: Right, but that just means that `full_group` doesn't do anything when the algorithm is invoked with a `sycl::group`, but improves performance when the algorithm is invoked with a `sycl::sub_group`.  The "group" in "full group" is intended to mean "anything satisfying the group concept" and not "`sycl::group`".

I want to push for a renaming of `sycl::group` to `sycl::work_group` to avoid this sort of confusion.

Reviewer 2: Then we need another property for the WG case, I think.

Reviewer 3: Why?  Maybe I'm misunderstanding what you're expecting to happen here.  I thought your earlier message was saying that work-groups were always "full"?

Reviewer 2: They are, but the block-read is SG-level intrinsic. We need SGs to be "full" to use them.

Reviewer 3: I think we're talking past each other.

Consider the below:

```c++
auto sg = it.get_sub_group();
group_load(sg, input, output_span, properties{contiguous_memory, full_group});
```

The interpretation here is that `sg` represents a full sub-group.

Reviewer 2: If the user writes

```
  auto g = it.get_group();
  group_load(g, input, output_span, properties{contiguous_memory, full_group});
```

we still can't use block loads without runtime checks. WG is full, but its last SG might not be. Also, `full_group` is meaningless for WG because it always full per SYCL spec `parallel_for`/`nd_range` restrictions.

Reviewer 3: We couldn't use block loads in this case anyway, because the stride in this case is the size of the work-group and not the sub-group.  You're right that we could generate block loads in some cases (like a work-group + blocked data placement) but I think we'd still need a runtime check because different devices carve up work-groups into sub-groups differently.

`full_group` is currently meaningless for work-groups, but I think it makes more sense to have a generic `full_group` than to make the property sub-group specific.  That allows a developer to write generic code that uses `full_group` and have it work in both cases, and it may be meaningful for future group types.
